It should be recording now.
Yes, it's making, making, making signs of recording.
Oops.
Hello.
Well, I think, yes, it's still recording.
It's just gone dull.
So this is Jim Barrett interviewing Stuart McCarty at his home on the 23rd of January
2018.
Stuart has signed the project consent form.
This interview is being recorded for Wunderbras 25 project funded by HLF Cymru.
Right, Stuart, so how did you first hear about Wunderbras?
I met Richard Evans at the Gmorgan Jazz summer school and then I saw Wunderbras play in the
evening.
And what was your impression of Wunderbras?
I thought it looked like a very exciting band and you just didn't see, you just don't see
bands that big anymore.
It was just like big and bold and brassy.
It was right up my street.
Big, bold, brassy and brash.
Yeah.
Right.
But in that mix, there was also some very good players and some really nice improvising
in that mix as well.
So how long had you been playing before you actually did Wunderbras?
No.
Or joined Wunderbras?
Probably about 15 years.
Do you play anything other than saxophone or was saxophone your first instrument?
No, I just play saxophone.
Okay, so how did you start playing the saxophone?
I played clarinet at school and I really liked it but I'm dyslexic so reading music was always
a huge struggle for me.
And so I was learning at school off written music and when I went home I used to go home
and practice by improvising and trying to work things out by ear instead of reading
the music.
Because there was no place for that in the school I went to, I only did it for about
three years and then I stopped playing.
And then I joined the army.
When I left the army, I met an old friend of mine, I've known since I was five, who
was in a new wave band.
And he said, you used to play clarinet didn't you?
And I said yeah and he said well do you want to be in a band?
But you should probably play saxophone.
So I went and bought a saxophone and was in a band.
I thought I did book a few lessons with a guy called Mark Buckingham.
So I had about a year of lessons from Mark to get the basics and then I've had little
bits of lessons on and off but mostly self taught.
Was it always tenor sax or did you play any other exercise?
I have flirted with, I had a, I used to play a, what were those plastic saxophones called?
Grafden, I used to play a grafden alto and I did play with, I did have a soprano at one
point as well.
But what I found is all that did is double your practice because unless you practice
on both, when you were playing out, changing over is difficult then.
And I just didn't have the time to do that much practice so I just concentrated on tenor.
And I've sold the others now.
It's always been my favourite to tell you the truth of all the saxophones.
It's always been tenor for me except for Eric Dolphy who's the only alto player who gets
in my path and on of tenor players.
Maybe Cannonball Adley on a good night.
And are there any particularly memorable occasions with Wunderbras playing with Wunderbras?
Oh, there were quite a few.
I've always said about Wunderbras, I've played some of the best gigs I've ever played with
Wunderbras but I've also played some of the worst.
And then we used to play a lot of street gigs and smaller gigs and we had the mini bus and
not many people could make it and you were sections short and you turn up and you go
oh no this is awful and just have to struggle through.
So I remember a few of those but then I remember playing at the Fuse Festival to 2,000 people
that was fantastic.
I also remember a great gig the first time we played on stage at Brecon and there weren't
many people in the audience and so the band decided to get off the stage and dance and
I think we were playing El Watuzzi and the rhythm section just carried on but then they
got to the part where it was my solo so I jumped back on stage in solo and people wouldn't
come back and I must have done 30 choruses running out of breath going please come back
30 choruses I'm running out of stuff to play now.
So that was a very memorable gig for me.
And then what other ones do I remember?
Oh and then I don't think I ever travelled abroad with Wonder Brass with all the things
they've done abroad I don't think I ever went abroad with Wonder Brass.
How many Brecons do you think you did?
I think I was involved with Wonder Brass for 10 years and I went every year so I must have
done about 9 or 10 something like that.
That's a long time with the band.
And I was in the band when we used to so I did that transition from playing on the street
at Brecon to being on the stage with other people like those were great gigs the Amapundo
gigs the gigs with Claude and Jason Yard those were oh they were really challenging but amazing
what a learning experience they were as well.
So those project gigs were really really good.
And you know I never thought I'd play at Brecon Jazz Festival never ever in a million years.
So that was Brecon was always the high point of the year for me really because you got
to play and then you got to go and see your heroes afterwards.
Yes.
And for free.
And as many of them as you liked it was fantastic.
It was good yes it was very good.
And since Wonder Brass what have you been doing since?
I've been going to jam sessions on and off since I left Wonder Brass and I'm now playing
a blues band.
Which is interesting because it means I have to know stuff because I'm the only horn player
and with Wonder Brass if you didn't quite know something you could probably just not
play.
Because there'd be another three tenor players you know and if there was a bit was tricky
you didn't know you just didn't play.
Now I've got to play all the time.
Do you think Wonder Brass enabled you to do things musically that you know otherwise
wouldn't have done?
Oh yeah absolutely yeah I mean done some amazing stuff.
As I said there was who's that is that Gaynor?
How'd you get in?
Was the front door open?
Oh dear.
Hello matey.
I'm being interviewed.
Four.
About Wonder Brass.
Wonder Brass.
Cheeky.
Okay and you know this sort of Wonder Brass 25 years.
Do you want to get involved with that?
Would you like to get anything particular out of that?
I would like to get involved with that.
I mean I would say I did try to join Wonder Brass again but during the time I'd left there
were many more people who would read music and I just couldn't I have to learn everything
by rote so I know it by rote and I just didn't have the time because instead of when I joined
there were many people couldn't read so we used to spend a long time learning a new piece
and now it's a couple of weeks and it's done and it just meant I was getting further and
further behind and yeah you know which was a shame because I do enjoy playing with Wonder
Brass but I've always I only learn the tune so I can improvise on it.
If I don't want to improvise on a tune I won't bother learning it.
Okay well I'm sure we can you know I'm sure we can there's plenty of tunes that we can
do that you would still remember so I'm sure we can sort out something.
Yeah yeah.
For the project.
That'll be good.
Yeah.
Okay.
It'll be nice to meet Nick and Claude again yeah as well.
Yeah yeah.
Okay great thanks Stuart thank you very much.
Thanks Brian.